---
title: "Macroeconomic Data Analysis"  
date: 2013-10-01
url: /c3/
aliases:
    - /t3.html
    - /uploads/7/0/2/0/70200055/t3a.pdf
    - /uploads/7/0/2/0/70200055/t3b.pdf
    - /uploads/7/0/2/0/70200055/t3c.pdf
    - /uploads/7/0/2/0/70200055/t3f.pdf
tags: ["time series","data analysis"]
author: "Giacomo Rondina"
description: "This upper-level undergraduate course covers the basic of time-series analysis with applications to macroeconomics." 
summary: "This graduate course covers basic mathematical methods for macroeconomics: dynamic programming, optimal control, and differential equations." 
cover:
    image: "/c3.png"
    alt: "Phase diagram depicting a saddle path"
    relative: false
editPost:
    URL: "https://github.com/pmichaillat/math-for-macro"
    Text: "Source files"
showToc: true
disableAnchoredHeadings: false

---

## Introduction

The courses examines time series methods for data analysis with an emphasis on macroeconomic
applications. The aim of the class is to provide students with a basic formal introduction to modern
time series techniques, hands-on experience in applying them to real-world macroeconomic data, and
understanding of how to bring data to bear on policy-relevant macroeconomic theories.

---

## Dynamic programming

This section starts by introducing the key concepts of dynamic programming in a simple, deterministic consumption-saving problem. It then introduces randomness into the consumption-saving problem and solve this stochastic problem with dynamic programming. Finally, to illustrate how to use dynamic programming in macroeconomics, we solve a Real Business-Cycle model using dynamic programming.

+ [Lecture notes](/x1.pdf)
+ [Problem set](/x4.pdf)
+ Reference: [Acemoglu (2008, chapter 6)](https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691132921/introduction-to-modern-economic-growth)

---

## Optimal control

This section starts by formulating the consumption-saving problem in continuous time. We solve this continuous-time problem first by using a present-value Hamiltonian, and then by using a current-value Hamiltonian. (Both approaches are equivalent.) Then we discuss optimality conditions for general optimization problems solved by optimal control. To conclude, we discuss the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation.

+ [Lecture notes](/x2.pdf)
+ [Problem set](/x5.pdf)
+ Reference: [Acemoglu (2008, chapter 7)](https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691132921/introduction-to-modern-economic-growth)

---

## Differential equations

In this section we first solve linear first-order differential equations. We then move to linear systems of first-order differential equations. Next we discuss how we can derive the properties of a linear system of first-order differential equations by drawing its phase diagram. Finally, we turn to nonlinear systems of first-order differential equations---which are common in macroeconomics. Although we cannot solve them explicitly, we characterize their properties by constructing their phase diagrams. 

+ [Lecture notes](/x3.pdf)
+ [Problem set](/x6.pdf)
+ Reference: [Hirsch, Smale, Devaney (2013, chapters 1–6)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780123820105/differential-equations-dynamical-systems-and-an-introduction-to-chaos)

---

## Conclusion

To conclude, a little more practice and an application. The problem set below brings together all the material from the course. And the paper below applies the course's techniques to analyze the New Keynesian model in normal times and at the zero lower bound. The analysis covers in particular the response to recessionary shocks, the effects of forward guidance, and the effects of government spending.

+ [Cumulative problem set](/x7.pdf)
+ [Application of optimal control and differential equations to the New Keynesian model](/11/)
